CLDR-16438 document filtering out unneeded data (#2761)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/ldml/tr35.md

  * Produce an error (set an error code or throw an exception) when an attempt is made to create a formatter with such a pattern or to apply such a pattern to an existing formatter.

## 8 <a name="Data_Size" href="#Data_Size">Data Size Reduction</a>
Software implementations may have constrained memory requirements. The following outlines some techniques for filtering out CLDR data for a particular implementation. The exact filtering would depend on the particular requirements of the implementation in question, of course.

Locale data can be _sliced_ to exclude data not needed by a particular implementation. This can be _vertical slicing_: excluding a locale and all the locales inheriting from them, or _horizontal slicing_: excluding particular types of data from all locales. For example:
  * A vertical slice could retain only those locales used in a particular set of markets, such as EU locales.
  * A horizontal slice could remove all data in the emoji/ directory, which are annotations for emoji and symbols.
  
Of course, both of these techniques can be applied.

### 8.1 <a name="Vertical_Slicing" href="#Vertical_Slicing">Vertical Slicing</a>

> It is important to note that if a particular locale is in a vertical slice, then all of its parents should be as well, because of inheritance. This is not a factor if the data is fully resolved, as in Javascript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to note that if a particular locale is in a vertical slice, then all of its parents should be as well, because of inheritance. This is not a factor if the data is fully resolved, as in the JSON format data.
```

correct name

Slicing can also remove related supplemental data. For example, the likely subtags data includes a large number of languages that may not be of interest for all implementations. Here are some sample techniques can be used to filter the data so that the number of mappings is reduced:

1. Only keep likely subtags data with for locales that are used in the implementation.
  * For example, if the implementation only includes the CLDR locales at Basic coverage in [Unicode CLDR - Coverage Levels](https://cldr.unicode.org/index/cldr-spec/coverage-levels) (and locales inheriting from them), then filter out all likely subtag data that doesn’t match. 

> 2. Filter out the locales as per #1, except also retain also those locales representing the official languages for for countries, based on data in supplementalData.xml. For a human-readable chart, see [Territory-Language Information](https://unicode-org.github.io/cldr-staging/charts/latest/supplemental/territory_language_information.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Filter out the locales as per #1, except also retain also those locales representing the official languages for countries, based on data in supplementalData.xml. For a human-readable chart, see [Territory-Language Information](https://unicode-org.github.io/cldr-staging/charts/latest/supplemental/territory_language_information.html).
```

> 2. Filter out the locales as per #1, except also retain also those locales representing the official languages for for countries, based on data in supplementalData.xml. For a human-readable chart, see [Territory-Language Information](https://unicode-org.github.io/cldr-staging/charts/latest/supplemental/territory_language_information.html).

Reviewer 2: Can you link to a section of the spec that discusses how official languages are encoded?

For example, is the recommendation to include _all_ official languages in supplementalData.xml, or is there an additional hierarchy of which official languages are most important to include from there? For example, many of the official languages are listed with fewer than 1% of speakers in their respective region, and some with 0 speakers.

In other words, I see three tiers of likely subtags applications may want to include:

1. Minimal set required for rendering the application (CLDR locales).
2. Larger set for better resolution of regional preferences and language matching.
3. Full set for maximal coverage in applications that have no size constraints.

I think when we are talking about including official languages, we're talking about use case 2. What precisely is the best way to define what set is most useful for that typical use case?

Author: Good question. 

It might be better for now to just replace #2 (because it is more complicated) with a broader note that:

What is chosen to filter depends very much on the application. Some information that might be useful for that is the [Supplemental Territory Information](https://unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-info.html#Supplemental_Territory_Information), which provides information on the use of languages in different countries/regions.

Author: Revamped this part

> ### 8.2 <a name="Horizontal_Slicing" href="#Horizontal_Slicing">Horizontal_Slicing</a>

Reviewer 2: The main reason to perform horizontal slicing is when an application wants to remove data required for powering some feature. If an app isn't performing date formatting, it can remove all transitive date formatting data, except if it is formatting currencies, it needs to retain some number formatting data. I don't understand how coverage levels play into this.

Author: Good point. Incorporated it, and also clarified the use of coverage information.

> The Comprehensive coverage level includes data that is above the Modern coverage level. This data is over and above what is typically needed by many applications. That data can be filtered out, at considerable savings in data size. The easiest way to do that is to use the CLDR tooling to filter the data before generating the implementation's data format. That way allows the implementation to have direct access to the CoverageLevel code that can determine the coverage level, for a given locale and path. Once the data is transformed, such as to the JSON format, the CoverageLevel code is no longer accessible. For example, here is a code snippet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paths at the Comprehensive [coverage level](tr35-info.md#Coverage_Levels) include data that is above the Modern coverage level. This data is over and above what is typically needed by many applications. That data can be filtered out, at considerable savings in data size. The easiest way to do that is to use the CLDR Java tooling (the `cldr-code` package) to filter the data before generating the implementation's data format. That way allows the implementation to have direct access to the CoverageLevel code that can determine the coverage level, for a given locale and path. Once the data is transformed, such as to the JSON format, the CoverageLevel code is no longer accessible. For example, here is a code snippet:
```

We use “coverage” to mean a couple of things (either a horizontal or vertical slice).  By mentioning _paths_ it clarifies that this is a horizontal slice.

Also, we don't talk a lot about the Java tools in the spec. That should perhaps be a link.
